📖 CAEP: Add support for infrastructure cluster resources to be managed externally (#4135)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20210203-unmanaged-infrastructure.md

---

> title: Proposal Template

Reviewer: please add the title

  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [User Stories](#user-stories)
      - [Story 1](#story-1)
      - [Story 2](#story-2)
    - [Requirements (Optional)](#requirements-optional)
      - [Functional Requirements](#functional-requirements)
        - [FR1](#fr1)
        - [FR2](#fr2)
      - [Non-Functional Requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
        - [NFR1](#nfr1)
        - [NFR2](#nfr2)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

If this proposal adds new terms, or defines some, make the changes to the book's glossary when in PR stage.

## Summary

> This proposal introduces first class support for "unmanaged" infrastructure for CAPI poviders to consolidate the boundaries between managed and unmanaged cluster infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: In order to help people reading this proposal but without context on the ongoing discussion IMO we should:
- define what managed/unmanage is (glossary)
- define what cluster infrastructure is with concrete examples from existing providers (e.g in CAPA = to VPC, EIP etc. etc)
- avoid using infrastructure without specifying "cluster " in front of it

> This proposal introduces first class support for "unmanaged" infrastructure for CAPI poviders to consolidate the boundaries between managed and unmanaged cluster infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces first class support for "unmanaged" infrastructure for CAPI providers to consolidate the boundaries between managed and unmanaged cluster infrastructure.
```

## Motivation

> Currently CAPI providers support an opinionated happy path to create and manage cluster infrastructure lifecycle. The fundamental use case we want to support is bring your own infrastructure. An "unmanaged" CAPI infraCluster won't reconcile or manage the lifecycle of the cluster infrastructure, but CAPI will be able to create compute nodes within it.

Reviewer: discussed with the CAPA maintainers that we might want to avoid using the term "bring your own infrastructure" as it's a bit too generic.

but deferring to the CAEP approvers if they are happy with this.

> This will ease adoption of CAPI in heterogenous real world environments with restricted privileges and where the provider infastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will ease adoption of CAPI in heterogeneous real world environments with restricted privileges and where the provider infrastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.
```

### Goals

- Introduce support for "unmanaged" infrastructure consistently across CAPI providers.

> - The machine controller must be able to operate and create machines when the infastructure is "unmanaged".

Reviewer: i do not see any mentions of other machine instance management such as removal. should this be made clearer?

### Non-Goals/Future Work

- Modify existing managed behaviour.

## Proposal

> Providers will add a `ManagementPolicy=Managed|Unmanaged` field to the provider infraCluster spec.

Reviewer 3: Move this text under implementation details I think.

**Managed**
- It will be default and will preserve existing behaviour.

**Unmanaged**

> - The provider infraCluster controller will skip any infrastructure reconciliation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The provider infraCluster controller will skip any infrastructure reconciliation with the exception of read-only queries to ensure the operation of the related cloud provider integration, e.g. required tags for working of the AWS Cloud Provider..
```

Author: I know we discuss about this but would you mind refreshing my mind where specifically you see the need to read?

Reviewer 4: IIRC there are some requirements for the cloud-controller-manager that the AWSCluster controller verifies at the moment. I think checking that tags have been set on the VPC correctly was one of them? 

I think it's reasonable that if a InfraCluster controller normally would perform validation of the environment it has created as a requirement for parts of core K8s to function, then we should also do this validation on an unmanaged cluster. 

Though, we should make sure the expectations of the environment are documented well so users can ensure their infrastructure provisioning can set the right tags etc.

Author: >cloud-controller-manager that the AWSCluster controller verifies at the moment.

@JoelSpeed @randomvariable I see, we have a list of this somewhere atm?

- The provider infraCluster will set readiness to true.

- The provider infraCluster will set a condition unamangedReady to true.

- CAPI will proceed with further reconciliation as usual.

The machine controller must be able to operate without hard dependencies regardless of the cluster infrastructure being managed or unmanaged.
![](https://i.imgur.com/nA61XJt.png)

### User Stories

> #### As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate kubernetes bootstraping while letting customers own their infrastructure lifecycle for the data plane.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Story 1 - Alternate control plane provisioning with user managed infrastructure
As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstraping while letting workload cluster operators own their infrastructure lifecycle for the data plane.
```
`data plane` is I suspect a net new term and needs defining in the glossary or substitution from existing terms.

> #### As a user I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstraping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Story 2 - Restricted access to cloud provider APIs
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstraping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider because of organisational cloud security constraints.
```

Use more specific personas than "user"

> #### As a user I want to use CAPI to orchestate kubenetes bootstraping while reusing my existing infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Story 3 - Consuming existing cloud infrastructure
#### As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestate Kubernetes bootstraping while reusing infrastructure that has already been created in the organisation either by me or another team.
```

#### As a user I want to use CAPI to orchestate kubernetes bootstraping while managing infrastructure lifecycle out of band with other tooling.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> As in [Proposal](#proposal).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
Can get rid of once you move the section directly here.

### Security Model

> When unmanaged no additional privileges for a cloud provider need to be given to CAPI other than the required to manage machines.

Reviewer 3: I think we need to have a section that deals with single controller multitenancy, and in addition modify the multitenancy contract doc in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4074 within this PR.

Author: Not sure how this would affect single controller multitenancy? In such a model privileges are given for each infraResource so this would be transparent right? can you elaborate a bit?

### Risks and Mitigations

## Alternatives

We could have and adhoc CRD https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/4095

> This would introudce complexity for the CAPI ecosystem with yet an additional CRD and it woudn't scale well across providers as it would need to contain provider specific information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This would introduce complexity for the CAPI ecosystem with yet an additional CRD and it woudn't scale well across providers as it would need to contain provider specific information.
```

## Upgrade Strategy

> 

Reviewer 3: Should add some commentary about which versions of CAPI this field is optional (i.e. v1alpha3) vs. potentially mandatory (v1alpha4? if at all) for providers.

E.g in AWS:
- Network
    - VPC
    - Subnets
    - Internet gateways
    - Nat gateways
    - Route tables
- Security groups
- Load balancers

### Unmanaged cluster infrastructure
Cluster infratructure which lifecycle is not managed by CAPI but rather by an external entity.

## Summary

This proposal introduces first class support for "unmanaged" infrastructure for CAPI providers to consolidate the boundaries between managed and unmanaged cluster infrastructure.

## Motivation

Currently, Cluster API infrastructure providers support an opinionated happy path to create and manage cluster infrastructure lifecycle. The fundamental use case we want to support is out of tree controllers or tools that can manage the infrastructure bits.

This will ease adoption of CAPI in heterogeneous real world environments with restricted privileges and where the provider infrastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.

### Goals

- Introduce support for "unmanaged" infrastructure consistently across CAPI providers.
- The machine controller must be able to operate and manage machines when the infastructure is "unmanaged".

### Non-Goals/Future Work

> - Modify existing managed behaviour.

Reviewer 5: non-goal: support externally managed machines

## Proposal

Providers will add a `ManagementPolicy=Managed|Unmanaged` field to the provider infraCluster spec.

An "unmanaged" CAPI infraCluster won't reconcile or manage the lifecycle of the cluster infrastructure, but CAPI will be able to create compute nodes within it.

The machine controller must be able to operate without hard dependencies regardless of the cluster infrastructure being managed or unmanaged.
![](https://i.imgur.com/nA61XJt.png)

### User Stories

#### Story 1 - Alternate control plane provisioning with user managed infrastructure
As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstraping while letting workload cluster operators own their infrastructure lifecycle.

#### Story 2 - Restricted access to cloud provider APIs
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstraping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider because of organisational cloud security constraints.

#### Story 3 - Consuming existing cloud infrastructure

> As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestate Kubernetes bootstraping while reusing infrastructure that has already been created in the organisation either by me or another team.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstraping while reusing infrastructure that has already been created in the organisation either by me or another team.
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

**Managed**
- It will be default and will preserve existing behaviour.

**Unmanaged**

- The provider infraCluster controller will skip any infrastructure reconciliation.

- The provider infraCluster will set readiness to true.

> - The provider infraCluster will set a condition unamangedReady to true.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The provider infraCluster will set a condition unmanagedReady to true.
```

      - [Functional Requirements](#functional-requirements)
        - [FR1](#fr1)
        - [FR2](#fr2)
      - [Non-Functional Requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
        - [NFR1](#nfr1)
        - [NFR2](#nfr2)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

### Managed cluster infrastructure

Cluster infratructure which lifecycle is managed by a provider infraCluster CR.
E.g in AWS:
- Network
    - VPC
    - Subnets
    - Internet gateways
    - Nat gateways
    - Route tables
- Security groups
- Load balancers

### Unmanaged cluster infrastructure

> Cluster infratructure which lifecycle is not managed by CAPI but rather by an external entity.

Reviewer 6: Could we call this `externally managed` rather than unmanaged?

Author: sgtm if everyone else is good with `externally manage`

Reviewer 5: +1 "unmanaged" conflicts with managed (AKS, EKS) vs unmanaged naming.

### Data plane

> Kubernetes endpoint accesible by a workload cluster admin which nodes capacity is intended exclusively to run user facing workloads

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Kubernetes endpoint accessible by a workload cluster admin which nodes capacity is intended exclusively to run user facing workloads.
```

I'm not sure I'm fully grasping this definition, could you clarify a bit?

Author: dropped the term to avoid confusion

## Summary

> This proposal introduces first class support for "unmanaged" infrastructure for CAPI providers to consolidate the boundaries between managed and unmanaged cluster infrastructure.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces first class support for externally managed infrastructure for Cluster API infrastructure providers to consolidate the boundaries between managed and unmanaged cluster infrastructure.
```

Author: let's discuss this here https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4135#discussion_r569607343

## Motivation

> Currently CAPI providers support an opinionated happy path to create and manage cluster infrastructure lifecycle. The fundamental use case we want to support is bring your own infrastructure. An "unmanaged" CAPI infraCluster won't reconcile or manage the lifecycle of the cluster infrastructure, but CAPI will be able to create compute nodes within it.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Currently, Cluster API infrastructure providers support an opinionated happy path to create and manage cluster infrastructure lifecycle. The fundamental use case we want to support out of tree controllers or tools that can manage the infrastructure bits.
```

> An "unmanaged" CAPI infraCluster won't reconcile or manage the lifecycle of the cluster infrastructure, but CAPI will be able to create compute nodes within it.

This is an implementation detail, rather than motivation

> This will ease adoption of CAPI in heterogeneous real world environments with restricted privileges and where the provider infrastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This will ease adoption of CAPI in heterogeneous real world environments with restricted privileges and where the provider infrastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.
```

Let's provide some concrete examples here?

Author: the user stories below are concrete examples

### Goals

> - Introduce support for "unmanaged" infrastructure consistently across CAPI providers.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Introduce support for externally-managed infrastructure consistently across Cluster API infrastructure providers.
```

Author: let's discuss this here https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4135#discussion_r569607343

> - The machine controller must be able to operate and manage machines when the infastructure is "unmanaged".

Reviewer 6: This seems an implementation detail, which I'm not totally in favor of. I'd rather try to bridge the behaviors and requirements rather than going down the path of requiring these controllers to change their behavior based on a filed, more concretely we should avoid having a bunch of `if <unmanaged> then do this; or do that`, instead we could consider a world where a contract is put in place where a controller _must_ be able to work in both modes consistently

Author: Let's discuss this here https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4135#discussion_r569620731

### Non-Goals/Future Work

- Modify existing managed behaviour.

## Proposal

> Providers will add a `ManagementPolicy=Managed|Unmanaged` field to the provider infraCluster spec.

Reviewer 6: Does this have to be a field? What about having an annotation exposed in Cluster API that every provider can act upon as a filter? 

Let's take AWS as an example, if a user would want to use something external to manage the infrastructure, we could require the interface is fields within `AWSCluster`. The `AWSMachine` controller, would keep using the existing code to get information from an `AWSCluster`, and doesn't have to know if it's managed internally or externally, it doesn't really matter at that point, the most important thing is that the struct could function as a bridge or interface between the infrastructure resources and the machine controller required data.

Author: >Does this have to be a field? What about having an annotation exposed in Cluster API that every provider can act upon as a filter?

A field seems the most reasonable to me as this is a consumer choice, express consumer intent and dictates behaviour, this is not metadata.

>Let's take AWS as an example, if a user would want to use something external to manage the infrastructure, we could require the interface is fields within AWSCluster. The AWSMachine controller, would keep using the existing code to get information from an AWSCluster, and doesn't have to know if it's managed internally or externally, it doesn't really matter at that point, the most important thing is that the struct could function as a bridge or interface between the infrastructure resources and the machine controller required data.

This is no go for scenarios where kubernetes bootstrapping and the cluster infrastructure for the workload are owned by different personas. See "Story 1 - Alternate control plane provisioning with user managed infrastructure".

Also this go be a no go for infra topology not matching managed expectations.

Reviewer 4: > The AWSMachine controller, would keep using the existing code to get information from an AWSCluster, and doesn't have to know if it's managed internally or externally,

I don't think the AWSMachine controller is the intended consumer of this field, I think it's actually the AWSCluster controller.

We had some discussion on monday around the fact that it is actually useful to keep the InfraCluster resource as the source of information for the InfraMachine. If I understood your suggestion correctly (here and in the other thread) the idea is that we put the infracluster information into something other than the infracluster CRD? Thus eliminating the InfraCluster controller from the equation?

@randomvariable pointed out that the AWSCluster controller has some validation code in it that verifies some preconditions for the cloud-controller-manager to work as expected. We would likely still want to keep this validation so that we can ensure the infrastructure provided BYO is still valid. I don't know if other providers have this kind of validation but if they do it's useful to keep the InfraCluster controllers in the loop just for the validation

Reviewer 2: Might be I'm a little bit naive here, but if the cluster infrastructure is externally managed, why the user is required to define an infraCluster. Should not be enough to fill in the ClusterEndpoint, and possibly failure domains?

Also, don't you think that re-using the existing infrastructureCluster objects to map externally managed infrastructure objects could be confusing from a user PoV (no matter of field or annotation)? Could we make it clear introducing new CRDs for externallManaged solutions, if required?

Reviewer 6: > If I understood your suggestion correctly (here and in the other thread) the idea is that we put the infracluster information into something other than the infracluster CRD? Thus eliminating the InfraCluster controller from the equation?

The original thinking I was going through was that if we want to allow for other systems or tools to manage the cloud infrastructure, we should provide a testable and validated "interface" (in this case it'd be the AWSCluster, or InfraCluster if you want to keep things generic). 

With a simple annotation on any InfraCluster, e.g. `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` we communicate the controllers that they shouldn't perform actions or reconcile these resources. Other controllers wouldn't look at the annotation, but instead only look at the information needed to proceed. For example, a contract requires the FailureDomains to be exposed, another (internal to AWS) may require VPC and security groups, those controllers use the InfraCluster managed by some external entity to reconcile their own resources.

The InfraCluster effectively becomes the tested and validated bridge between different components.

Reviewer 3: > Should not be enough to fill in the ClusterEndpoint, and possibly failure domains?

That tells you nothing about the VPC, subnets or security groups the control plane is in. We need to bare in mind that there are infrastructure specific concerns that are not completely abstractable.

#### Story 2 - Restricted access to cloud provider APIs
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstraping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider because of organisational cloud security constraints.

#### Story 3 - Consuming existing cloud infrastructure
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestate Kubernetes bootstraping while reusing infrastructure that has already been created in the organisation either by me or another team.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

**Managed**
- It will be default and will preserve existing behaviour.

**Unmanaged**

- The provider infraCluster controller will skip any infrastructure reconciliation.

- The provider infraCluster will set readiness to true.

- The provider infraCluster will set a condition unamangedReady to true.

- CAPI will proceed with further reconciliation as usual.

### Security Model

When unmanaged no additional privileges for a cloud provider need to be given to CAPI other than the required to manage machines.

#### Multitenancy

> CAPI supports a best effort multitenancy model with deploying multiple controllers. In this scenario adhoc privileges for each controller can be granted to satisfy "managed" or "unmanaged" cluster nifrastr

Reviewer 6: I'm not sure if this is going to be the case any longer, could you clarify why this requirement is in this proposal? Isn't enough to have the distinction on the InfrastructureCluster level?

Author: this is a typo, I don't think we need to mention multitenancy here as it should be transparent https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/pull/4135#discussion_r569591067

While an "externally managed" InfraCluster won't reconcile or manage the lifecycle of the cluster infrastructure, CAPI will still be able to create compute nodes within it.

The machine controller must be able to operate without hard dependencies regardless of the cluster infrastructure being managed or externally managed.
![](https://i.imgur.com/nA61XJt.png)

### User Stories

#### Story 1 - Alternate control plane provisioning with user managed infrastructure
As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstraping while letting workload cluster operators own their infrastructure lifecycle.

#### Story 2 - Restricted access to cloud provider APIs
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstraping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider because of organisational cloud security constraints.

#### Story 3 - Consuming existing cloud infrastructure
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestate Kubernetes bootstraping while reusing infrastructure that has already been created in the organisation either by me or another team.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

> **Managed**

Reviewer 2: What about adding a note that reminds that Mananged = InfraCluster without  the `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` annotation

- It will be default and will preserve existing behaviour.

> **Externally Managed**

Reviewer 2: What about adding a note that reminds that Externally Managed = InfraCluster with  the `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` annotation

> The provider InfraCluster controller will:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The provider InfraCluster controller MUST:
```

> - Skip any reconciliation of the resource.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

> - Will not update the resource or its status in any way

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Not update the resource or its status in any way, possibly using a predicate to ignore reconciliation altogether.
```

> The external management system will:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The external management system MUST:
```

- Populate all required fields within the InfraCluster spec to allow other CAPI components to continue as normal.

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Adhere to all Cluster API contracts for infrastructure providers.
```

> - When the infrastructure is ready, set the appropriate status as is done by the provider controller today.

Reviewer 2: Make this a sub-point of "Adhere to all Cluster API contracts for infrastructure providers."

#### Provider implementation changes

> To enable providers to implement the changes required by this contract, we will provide a new `InfraClusterExternallyManaged` predicate.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
To enable providers to implement the changes required by this contract, Cluster API is going to provide a new `predicates.ResourceExternallyManaged` predicate as part of its utils.
```

> This will filter out any InfraCluster resource that has been marked as "externally managed" and will prevent the controller from reconciling the resource.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This predicate filters out any resource that has been marked as "externally managed" and prevents the controller from reconciling the resource.
```

### Security Model

> When externally managed, no additional privileges for a cloud provider need to be given to CAPI other than the required to manage machines.

Reviewer 6: What does this mean in practice?

### Risks and Mitigations

#### What happens when a user coverts an externally managed InfraCluster to a managed InfraCluster?

Whether the flag for being managed is an annotation or field on the InfraCluster, there currently is no immutability support for CRD fields or annotations within the Kubernetes API.

This means that, once a user has created their externally managed InfraCluster, they could at some point, update the annotation/field to make the InfraCluster appear to be managed.

There is no way to predict what would happen in this scenario.
The InfraCluster controller would start attempting to reconcile infrastructure that it did not create, and therefore, there may be assumptions it makes that mean it cannot manage this infrastructure.

> To prevent this, we will have to implement (in the InfraCluster webhook) a means to prevent users converting externally managed InfraClusters into managed InfraClusters.

Reviewer 2: What about adding this as a requirement for the external management system up in the document?

Reviewer 2: TBH I would prefer to lust this as a responsibility of the External providers, because I don't see how this can be centralised given that we are talking about InfraCluster objects and one of the of the goal of this KEP is to avoid changes to the existing infrastructure providers.
If instead you can come out with a solution that centralises this responsibility, +1 to that

Reviewer 4: I was wondering about a generic validating webhook that could be implemented to look at the metadata only (therefore could accept any type), this code could be provided centrally and generic, but providers or external infrastructure providers would need to set it up to look at the correct type

Ie all they would need to do is configure the ValidatingWebhookConfiguration correctly. Do you think something like this would work/be useful?

### Future Work

#### Marking InfraCluster ready manually

The content of this proposal assumes that the management of the external infrastructure is done by some controller which has the ability to set the spec and status of the InfraCluster resource.

In reality, this may not be the case. For example, if the infrastructure was created by an admin using Terraform.

When using a system such as this, a user can copy the details from the infrastructure into an InfraCluster resource and create this manually.
However, they will not be able to set the InfraCluster to ready as this requires updating the resource status which is difficult when not using a controller.

To allow users to adopt this external management pattern without the need for writing their own controllers or tooling, we will provide a longer term solution that allows a user to indicate that the infrastructure is ready and have the status set appropriately.

The exact mechanism for how this will work is undecided, though the following ideas have been suggested:

- Write a kubectl plugin that allows a user to mark their InfraCluster resources as ready

> - Add a secondary annotation to this contract that causes the provider InfraCluster controller to mark resources as ready

Reviewer 2: Assuming that this requires all the infrastructure providers to reconcile the externally managed infra clusters, I'm +1 to remove this option from the list

Reviewer 2: ok to keep to as a record, but please add a note reporting the outcome of the discussion.

Reviewer 5: Has this been done?

Reviewer 7: I would also prefer to not implement this option as it's basically additional complexity in ClusterAPI because of a (current) limitation of kubectl which will probably be resolved mid-term: [[WIP] kubectl: support --subresource flag #99556](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/99556)

---
title: Externally Managed cluster infastructure
authors:
  - "@enxebre"
  - "@joelspeed"
  - "@alexander-demichev"
reviewers:
  - "@vincepri"
  - "@randomvariable"
  - "@CecileRobertMichon"
  - "@yastij"

>   

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

      - [Functional Requirements](#functional-requirements)
        - [FR1](#fr1)
        - [FR2](#fr2)
      - [Non-Functional Requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
        - [NFR1](#nfr1)
        - [NFR2](#nfr2)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

### Managed cluster infrastructure

Cluster infratructure which lifecycle is managed by a provider infraCluster CR.
E.g in AWS:
- Network
    - VPC
    - Subnets
    - Internet gateways
    - Nat gateways
    - Route tables
- Security groups
- Load balancers

> ### Externally managed cluster infrastructure
> Cluster infratructure which lifecycle is not managed by CAPI but rather by an external entity.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Externally managed cluster infrastructure

An InfrastructureCluster resource (usually part of an infrastructure provider) which lifecycle is managed by an external controller.
```

## Summary

> This proposal introduces first class support for "externally managed" infrastructure for CAPI providers.
> This consolidates the boundaries between CAPI managed (existing pattern) and externally managed ("Bring Your Own") cluster infrastructure.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces support to allow infrastructure cluster resources (e.g. AzureCluster, AWSCluster, vSphereCluster, etc.) to be managed by an external controller or tool.
```

I wasn't sure what the second paragraph added here, so removed it.

## Motivation

Currently, Cluster API infrastructure providers support an opinionated happy path to create and manage cluster infrastructure lifecycle.

> The fundamental use case we want to support is out of tree controllers or tools that can manage this cluster infrastructure.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The fundamental use case we want to support is out of tree controllers or tools that can manage these resources.
```

> For example, this could allow users to create clusters using tooling such as Terraform or Kops and allow them to add CAPI Machine infrastructure as a day 2 operation.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
For example, users could create clusters using tools such as Terraform, Crossplane, or Kops.
```

What does "CAPI Machine infrastructure as a day 2 operation" mean in this context?

Reviewer 8: I believe this means using CAPI on infrastructure that was already configured and installed.

> This will also ease adoption of CAPI in heterogeneous real world environments with restricted privileges and where the provider infrastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The proposal might also ease adoption of Cluster API in heavily restricted environments where the provider infrastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.
```

### Goals

> - Introduce support for "externally managed" infrastructure consistently across CAPI providers.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Introduce support for "externally managed" cluster infrastructure consistently across Cluster API providers.
```

> - The machine controller must be able to operate and manage machines when the infastructure is "externally managed".

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Any machine controller or machine infrastructure controllers must be able to keep operating like they do today.
```

> - Reuse existing InfraCluster CRDs in "externally managed" clusters to minimise differences between the two topologies.

Reviewer 6: What do you mean here?

Reviewer 8: This means that no additional CRDs should be created for externally managed infrastructure use cases.

### Non-Goals/Future Work

- Modify existing managed behaviour.
- Automatically mark InfraCluster resources as ready (this will be up to the external management component initially).

> - Support externally managed machines.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Support anything other than cluster infrastructure (e.g. machines).
```

## Proposal

> A new contract will be defined around an annotation `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A new annotation `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` is going to be defined in Cluster API core repository,
```

> This annotation will identify a system which is providing external management of the infrastructure.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
which helps define and identify resources managed by external controllers.
```

> It is expected that all providers will adhere to the contract being defined by this proposal.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Infrastructure providers SHOULD respect the annotation and its contract.
```

When this annotation is present on an InfraCluster resource, the InfraCluster controller is expected to ignore the resource and not perform any reconciliation.

> Importantly, it will not modify the resource or its status in any way.

Reviewer 6: Should we mention that Cluster API is providing a predicate to filter events out?

Reviewer 4: This is added just below this, can we resolve?

Infrastructure providers SHOULD respect the annotation and its contract.

When this annotation is present on an InfraCluster resource, the InfraCluster controller is expected to ignore the resource and not perform any reconciliation.
Importantly, it will not modify the resource or its status in any way.
A predicate will be provided in the Cluster API repository to aid provider implementations in filtering resources that are externally managed.

Additionally, the external management system must provide all required fields within the spec of the InfraCluster and must adhere to the CAPI provider contract and set the InfraCluster status to be ready when it is appropriate to do so.

While an "externally managed" InfraCluster won't reconcile or manage the lifecycle of the cluster infrastructure, CAPI will still be able to create compute nodes within it.

The machine controller must be able to operate without hard dependencies regardless of the cluster infrastructure being managed or externally managed.
![](https://i.imgur.com/nA61XJt.png)

### User Stories

> #### Story 1 - Alternate control plane provisioning with user managed infrastructure
> As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstrapping while letting workload cluster operators own their infrastructure lifecycle.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Story 1 - Alternate control plane provisioning with user managed infrastructure
As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstrapping while letting workload cluster operators own their infrastructure lifecycle.

For example, Cluster API Provider AWS only supports a single architecture for delivery of network resources for cluster infrastructure, but given the possible variations in network architecture in AWS, the majority of organisations are going to want to provision VPCs, security groups and load balancers themselves, and then have Cluster API Provider AWS provision machines as normal. Currently CAPA supports "bring your own infrastructure" when users fill in the `AWSCluster` spec, and then CAPA reconciles any missing resources. This has been done in an ad hoc fashion, and has proven to be a frequently brittle mechanism with many bugs. The AWSMachine controller only requires a subset of the AWSCluster resource in order to reconcile machines, in particular - subnet, load balancer (for control plane instances) and security groups. Having a formal contract for externally managed infrastructure would improve the user experience for those getting started with Cluster API and have non-trivial networking requirements.
```

> #### Story 2 - Restricted access to cloud provider APIs
> As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstrapping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider because of organisational cloud security constraints.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Story 2 - Restricted access to cloud provider APIs
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstrapping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider because of organisational cloud security constraints.

Following from the example in Story 1, many AWS environments are tightly governed by an organisation's cloud security operations unit, and provisioning of security groups in particular is often prohibited.
```

#### Story 3 - Consuming existing cloud infrastructure
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestate Kubernetes bootstrapping while reusing infrastructure that has already been created in the organisation either by me or another team.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

**Managed**

- It will be default and will preserve existing behaviour. An InfraCluster CR without the `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` annotation.

**Externally Managed**

An InfraCluster CR with the `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` annotation.

The provider InfraCluster controller must:
- Skip any reconciliation of the resource.

- Not update the resource or its status in any way

The external management system must:

- Populate all required fields within the InfraCluster spec to allow other CAPI components to continue as normal.

> - Adhere to all Cluster API contracts for infrastructure providers.

Reviewer 7: Is there anything special we have to consider regarding cluster deletion? I think it should by pretty similar to cluster creation, so I assume this will work out.

Author: Cluster resource deletion will enforce deletion ordering of resources as usual and the infraProvider CR should just no-op, same as creation.

- When the infrastructure is ready, set the appropriate status as is done by the provider controller today.

#### Provider implementation changes

To enable providers to implement the changes required by this contract, Cluster API is going to provide a new `predicates.ResourceExternallyManaged` predicate as part of its utils.

This predicate filters out any resource that has been marked as "externally managed" and prevents the controller from reconciling the resource.

### Security Model

When externally managed, the required cloud provider privileges required by CAPI might be significantly reduced when compared with a traditionally managed cluster.
The only privileges required by CAPI are those that are required to manage machines.

> For example, when an AWS cluster is managed by CAPI, persmissions are required to be able to create VPCs and other networking components that are managed by the AWSCluster controller. When externally managed, these permissions are not required as the external entity is reponsible for creating such components.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, when an AWS cluster is managed by CAPI, persmissions are required to be able to create VPCs and other networking components that are managed by the AWSCluster controller. When externally managed, these permissions are not required as the external entity is reponsible for creating such components.

Support for minimising permissions in Cluster API Provider AWS will be added to its IAM provisioning tool, `clusterawsadm`.
```

It will be documented as part of the externally managed contract that this is a one way operation.

### Future Work

#### Marking InfraCluster ready manually

The content of this proposal assumes that the management of the external infrastructure is done by some controller which has the ability to set the spec and status of the InfraCluster resource.

In reality, this may not be the case. For example, if the infrastructure was created by an admin using Terraform.

When using a system such as this, a user can copy the details from the infrastructure into an InfraCluster resource and create this manually.
However, they will not be able to set the InfraCluster to ready as this requires updating the resource status which is difficult when not using a controller.

To allow users to adopt this external management pattern without the need for writing their own controllers or tooling, we will provide a longer term solution that allows a user to indicate that the infrastructure is ready and have the status set appropriately.

The exact mechanism for how this will work is undecided, though the following ideas have been suggested:

> - Write a kubectl plugin that allows a user to mark their InfraCluster resources as ready

Reviewer 3: Given @nikhita 's POC and KEP on adding support for modifying status and scale subresources, I think we can update this and cross-link?

Author: sg but I can't find it. Would you mind sharing it?

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/99556 was the POC. Nikhita's taking user stories in the comments there to then convert to a KEP.

Author: thanks! updated.

- Add a secondary annotation to this contract that causes the provider InfraCluster controller to mark resources as ready

## Alternatives

### ExternalInfra CRD

We could have an adhoc CRD https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/4095

This would introduce complexity for the CAPI ecosystem with yet an additional CRD and it woudn't scale well across providers as it would need to contain provider specific information.

### ManagementPolicy field

As an alternative to the proposed annotation, a `ManagementPolicy` field on Infrastructure Cluster spec could be required as part of this contract.

> The field would be an enum that initially has 2 posisble values: managed and unmanaged.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
The field would be an enum that initially has 2 possible values: managed and unmanaged.
```

> That would require a new provider contract and modification of existing infrastructure CRDs, so this option is not preferred.

Reviewer 7: I think implementing it via an annotation is also a new provider contract. Nevertheless I also prefer implementing it via an annotation for now so we don't have to adjust all CRDs.

## Upgrade Strategy

Support is introduced by adding a new annotation for the provider infraCluster.

This makes any transition towards an externally managed cluster backward compatible and leave the current managed behaviour untouched.

## Additional Details

## Implementation History

- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Proposed idea in an issue or [community meeting]
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Compile a Google Doc following the CAEP template (link here)
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: First round of feedback from community
- [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Present proposal at a [community meeting]

> - [ ] MM/DD/YYYY: Open proposal PR

Reviewer 3: Let's update these dates based on the slack conversations and video call that we had.

---
title: Externally Managed cluster infastructure
authors:
  - "@enxebre"
  - "@joelspeed"
  - "@alexander-demichev"
reviewers:
  - "@vincepri"
  - "@randomvariable"
  - "@CecileRobertMichon"

>   - "@yastij"

Reviewer 2: Pleas add all the people who provided feedback on this PR

Author: I included you, please let me know if you are missing anyone else.

creation-date: 2021-02-03
last-updated: 2021-02-12
status: implementable
see-also:
replaces:
superseded-by:
---

# Externally Managed cluster infrastucture

## Table of Contents

A table of contents is helpful for quickly jumping to sections of a proposal and for highlighting
any additional information provided beyond the standard proposal template.

> [Tools for generating](https://github.com/ekalinin/github-markdown-toc) a table of contents from markdown are available.

Reviewer 2: This seems a left over from the template

> - [Title](#title)

Reviewer 4: Do we need to regenerate this TOC before we can merge?

Author: not sure how to do it, is there any automation for this?

Reviewer 8: https://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc/  or any other software you can find :)

Reviewer 3: Markdown all in one in VS Code will regenerate TOCs for you.

    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals/Future Work](#non-goalsfuture-work)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [User Stories](#user-stories)
      - [Story 1](#story-1)
      - [Story 2](#story-2)
    - [Requirements (Optional)](#requirements-optional)
      - [Functional Requirements](#functional-requirements)
        - [FR1](#fr1)
        - [FR2](#fr2)
      - [Non-Functional Requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
        - [NFR1](#nfr1)
        - [NFR2](#nfr2)
    - [Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints)
    - [Security Model](#security-model)
    - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Upgrade Strategy](#upgrade-strategy)
  - [Additional Details](#additional-details)
    - [Test Plan [optional]](#test-plan-optional)
    - [Graduation Criteria [optional]](#graduation-criteria-optional)
    - [Version Skew Strategy [optional]](#version-skew-strategy-optional)
  - [Implementation History](#implementation-history)

## Glossary

Refer to the [Cluster API Book Glossary](https://cluster-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/glossary.html).

### Managed cluster infrastructure

> Cluster infratructure which lifecycle is managed by a provider infraCluster CR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cluster infrastructure which lifecycle is managed by a provider infraCluster CR.
```
nit

The proposal might also ease adoption of Cluster API in heavily restricted environments where the provider infrastructure for the cluster needs to be managed out of band.

### Goals

- Introduce support for "externally managed" cluster infrastructure consistently across Cluster API providers.
- Any machine controller or machine infrastructure controllers must be able to keep operating like they do today.
- Reuse existing InfraCluster CRDs in "externally managed" clusters to minimise differences between the two topologies.

### Non-Goals/Future Work

- Modify existing managed behaviour.
- Automatically mark InfraCluster resources as ready (this will be up to the external management component initially).
- Support anything other than cluster infrastructure (e.g. machines).

## Proposal

A new annotation `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` is going to be defined in Cluster API core repository, which helps define and identify resources managed by external controllers. The value of the annotation will not be checked by Cluster API and is considered free form text.

> Infrastructure providers SHOULD respect the annotation and its contract.

Author: Hey @CecileRobertMichon Are you missing anything here I can add?

> Infrastructure providers SHOULD respect the annotation and its contract.

Reviewer 3: Need to add the contract to
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/tree/master/docs/book/src/developer/providers

When this annotation is present on an InfraCluster resource, the InfraCluster controller is expected to ignore the resource and not perform any reconciliation.
Importantly, it will not modify the resource or its status in any way.
A predicate will be provided in the Cluster API repository to aid provider implmentations in filtering resources that are externally managed.

Additionally, the external management system must provide all required fields within the spec of the InfraCluster and must adhere to the CAPI provider contract and set the InfraCluster status to be ready when it is appropriate to do so.

While an "externally managed" InfraCluster won't reconcile or manage the lifecycle of the cluster infrastructure, CAPI will still be able to create compute nodes within it.

The machine controller must be able to operate without hard dependencies regardless of the cluster infrastructure being managed or externally managed.
![](https://i.imgur.com/nA61XJt.png)

> ### User Stories

Reviewer 9: Based on these user stories, it feels like the intention is to leverage CAPI for cluster lifecycle management- bootstrapping, upgrades, and not the cluster infra management.
In environments where we want CAPI to work with pre-provisioned infra and not manage infra provisioning. I am curious why support for machine reconciliation is a non-goal for this proposal.

Author: >Based on these user stories, it feels like the intention is to leverage CAPI for cluster lifecycle management- bootstrapping, upgrades, and not the cluster infra management.
In environments where we want CAPI to work with pre-provisioned infra and not manage infra provisioning.

Right, in such environments we want to ensure we support the choice of using automated machine/node management through capi.

Reviewer 9: I guess I didn't follow the scenario where we will have partial control over infra provisioning, i.e. provisioning machines but not cluster infra resources. Just for my understanding, can you please provide pointers so that I can understand this scenario better?

#### Story 1 - Alternate control plane provisioning with user managed infrastructure

> As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstraping while letting workload cluster operators own their infrastructure lifecycle.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
As a cluster provider I want to use CAPI in my service offering to orchestrate Kubernetes bootstrapping while letting workload cluster operators own their infrastructure lifecycle.
```

#### Story 2 - Restricted access to cloud provider APIs
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestrate kubernetes bootstraping while restricting the privileges I need to grant for my cloud provider because of organisational cloud security constraints.

#### Story 3 - Consuming existing cloud infrastructure
As a cluster operator I want to use CAPI to orchestate Kubernetes bootstraping while reusing infrastructure that has already been created in the organisation either by me or another team.

> ### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

Reviewer 9: Can you please clarify how this annotation will be used for the auto-healing of nodes based on machine health checks?

Reviewer 9: Also, how will the other Infra controllers honor this annotation on the InfraCluster CR?

Author: >Can you please clarify how this annotation will be used for the auto-healing of nodes based on machine health checks?

This is transparent for MHC. ```- Any machine controller or machine infrastructure controllers must be able to keep operating like they do today.``` is a goal of this proposal.

>Also, how will the other Infra controllers honor this annotation on the InfraCluster CR?

Which ones in particular are you referring to? only the infraCluster controller is meant to read this annotation.

Reviewer 9: Sorry about the delay in getting back on this. But I was referring to the InfraMachine controllers and also the load balancer controller that will be implemented as part of the loadbalancer provider proposal. But your point of the annotation being consumed only by the InfraCluster controller clarifies. Thanks!

**Managed**

- It will be default and will preserve existing behaviour. An InfraCluster CR without the `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` annotation.

**Externally Managed**

An InfraCluster CR with the `cluster.x-k8s.io/managed-by: "<name-of-system>"` annotation.

The provider InfraCluster controller must:
- Skip any reconciliation of the resource.

- Not update the resource or its status in any way

The external management system must:

- Populate all required fields within the InfraCluster spec to allow other CAPI components to continue as normal.

- Adhere to all Cluster API contracts for infrastructure providers.

- When the infrastructure is ready, set the appropriate status as is done by the provider controller today.

#### Provider implementation changes

To enable providers to implement the changes required by this contract, Cluster API is going to provide a new `predicates.ResourceExternallyManaged` predicate as part of its utils.

This predicate filters out any resource that has been marked as "externally managed" and prevents the controller from reconciling the resource.

### Security Model

> When externally managed, the required cloud provider privileges are significantly reduced when compared with a traditionally managed cluster.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure I understand what you mean here. By "cloud provider", do you mean k8 cloud controller manager or the infrastructure / cloud? How are the privileges "significantly reduced"?

Reviewer 9: I think this is referring to the InfraCloud controller.
My interpretation of the reduced privileges is because the InfraCluster controller will no longer have to provision infrastructure resources and therefore will not need the corresponding permissions.

The only privileges required by CAPI are those that are required to manage machines.

> For example, when an AWS cluster is managed by CAPI, persmissions are required to be able to create VPCs and other networking components that are managed by the AWSCluster controller. When externally managed, these permissions are not required as the external entity is reponsible for creating such components.

Reviewer 5: Okay reading this it makes a little more sense. I think this is only true for AWS. Other clouds like Azure don't operate with per resource permissions, instead you would give your service principal reader/contributor/owner permissions at a certain scope, like the resource group for example.

In that case, I would change the above sentence to "The cloud provider privileges required by CAPI might be reduced when compared with a managed cluster infrastructure."

### Risks and Mitigations

#### What happens when a user converts an externally managed InfraCluster to a managed InfraCluster?

> Whether the flag for being managed is an annotation or field on the InfraCluster, there currently is no immutability support for CRD fields or annotations within the Kubernetes API.

Reviewer 2: What about removing mentions to using a field?
```suggestion
There currently is no immutability support for CRD annotations within the Kubernetes API.
```

> This means that, once a user has created their externally managed InfraCluster, they could at some point, update the annotation/field to make the InfraCluster appear to be managed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that, once a user has created their externally managed InfraCluster, they could at some point, update the annotation to make the InfraCluster appear to be managed.
```

> There is no way to predict what would happen in this scenario.

Reviewer 5: what about API conversions/downgrades? If a user creates a v1alpha4 externally managed cluster and converts it to v1alpha3 for example (v1alpha3 having no knowledge of this annotation)

Author: mm I think we should communicate clearly this is supported >= v1alpha4. Do you have any suggestion to mitigate the this scenario?

In reality, this may not be the case. For example, if the infrastructure was created by an admin using Terraform.

When using a system such as this, a user can copy the details from the infrastructure into an InfraCluster resource and create this manually.
However, they will not be able to set the InfraCluster to ready as this requires updating the resource status which is difficult when not using a controller.

To allow users to adopt this external management pattern without the need for writing their own controllers or tooling, we will provide a longer term solution that allows a user to indicate that the infrastructure is ready and have the status set appropriately.

The exact mechanism for how this will work is undecided, though the following ideas have been suggested:

- Write a kubectl plugin that allows a user to mark their InfraCluster resources as ready

- Add a secondary annotation to this contract that causes the provider InfraCluster controller to mark resources as ready

## Alternatives

### ExternalInfra CRD

> We could have and adhoc CRD https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/4095

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We could have an adhoc CRD https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/issues/4095
```

Author: >Has this been done?

No, this is recording discussions that had happened for future context. See ```The exact mechanism for how this will work is undecided, though the following ideas have been suggested: ...```

This would introduce complexity for the CAPI ecosystem with yet an additional CRD and it woudn't scale well across providers as it would need to contain provider specific information.

### ManagementPolicy field

As an alternative to the proposed annotation, a `ManagementPolicy` field on Infrastructure Cluster spec could be required as part of this contract.
The field would be an enum that initially has 2 posisble values: managed and unmanaged.
That would require a new provider contract and modification of existing infrastructure CRDs, so this option is not preferred.

## Upgrade Strategy

> Support is introduced by adding a new field for the provider infraCluster.

Reviewer 5: Does this section need to be updated? We're not actually adding a new field anymore
